
.. _../pages/guide/spell_checker_case_studies#a_spellchecker_for_your_language:

A spellchecker for your language
********************************

Does the current spellchecking software work well for your language? As
software is translated into more and more languages, we are finding that
writing aids software based on European-language structures is less and less
effective.

So what can we do about it? It's time to review our current resources, and work
together to create writing aids tools appropriate to a wider range of
languages, or appropriate to specific languages. Some case-studies are
discussed below.

This page will link to discussions on this subject in different mailing lists,
to wiki pages detailing it for and in different languages, and to software
being developed, or which can be used, to meet these needs.

Please add any information you think could be useful. :)

.. _../pages/guide/spell_checker_case_studies#case_studies:

Case Studies
============

.. _../pages/guide/spell_checker_case_studies#vietnamese:

Vietnamese
----------

.. _../pages/guide/spell_checker_case_studies#nguyễn_thái_ngọc_duy:

Nguyễn Thái Ngọc Duy
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
I have been working on vspell, a Vietnamese spell checker, since 2003 (there
were huge gaps when I did not work on it at all, though). The `source code
<http://repo.or.cz/w/vspell.git>`_ is available (click on the first "snapshot"
link to get a tarball). The core idea is quite simple. It is trained with a
word-segmented corpus. When a sentence is given (actually a phrase because it
still does not understand "sentence"), it will generate similar sentences based
on common spelling errors. It then uses statistics from the corpus to determine
which sentence (the original one or one of the generated ones) is "better". If
a generated one is better, then it assumes the original one is misspelled.
That's all. The rest of work is matching the original one and the "right" one
to see differences between them and tell users about that.

The result as of three months ago was not very promising: precise rate was
about 60%-70% (I expected at least 80% to be useful). I was investigating to
see why the precise rate was low, and had some technical difficulties.

I've been working on a spellng checker for Vietnamese. The problems are:

* It requires input as phrases, not words. As far as I can tell, hunspell and
  almost all spelling checkers take input as words.
* It uses a lot of memory (≥ 256MB for itself)
* It needs to be trained to be able to differentiate good phrases and bad
  phrases. There are some difficulties in my training method (I don't know, I
  may give up on my method, as it is becoming infeasible, something with number
  explosion).
* It's not stable. I spent most of my time training it and testing it with a
  small sample. It liked to crash back then ;)

The first problem means we must interact with Openoffice without Hunspell.
That's not easy to do.

But the main problem is the third. My approach is statistics-based. It requires
lots of (correct) word-aligned sentences to be trained on.  That kind of corpus
for Vietnamese does not exist (at least freely).  So my workaround is to take a
raw corpus and train repeatedly to get better result each iteration. The
workaround has number explosion problem. It breaks 32-bit integer limit easily
and also "long double" limit. In short, until I find a feasible training
method, my spell checker is no use.

.. _../pages/guide/spell_checker_case_studies#the_basic_problem_in_vietnamese:

The basic problem in Vietnamese
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Vietnamese "words" are often composed of more than one word. Words are usually
monosyllabic, so we can think of them as syllables of these longer words.
However, current spellchecking tools treat each Vietnamese "syllable" as a
separate word. This means that when you make a mistake that is still a valid
word, e.g. typing **màu hình** instead of **màn hình**, current spellchecking
tools will still recognize « màu » and « hình » as valid separate words, and
not detect the error.

.. _../pages/guide/spell_checker_case_studies#ivan_garcia:

Ivan Garcia
^^^^^^^^^^^
(Note: Ivan's current `Hunspell
<http://code.google.com/p/hunspell-spellcheck-vi/>`_ spellchecking dictionary
is being used in OpenOffice.org, and in Firefox and Thunderbird.)

.. _../pages/guide/spell_checker_case_studies#duy:

Duy
^^^

I know my statistical method isn't ideal. A rule-based approach would be more
realistic. But the rule-based one requires human power to build the ruleset. A
rule generation approach like `TBL
<http://stp.ling.uu.se/~torbjorn/Mutbl/bibliography.html>`_ (Transformation
Based Learning) requires an annotated corpus, which I don't have.

Identifying composed words is also what I want my spellchecker to do.

I don't think a grammar-checker is viable, due to the complexity of Vietnamese
grammar. My spellchecker is basically a spellchecker. Although it could also be
able to detect some semantic/grammatic mistakes as well.

Even using current grammar-checking tools, you will have more troubles with
Vietnamese ;) Before you discuss grammar, you must split a sentence into words
(actually annotated words but that's not the point). It's already difficult to
do that in Vietnamese. Now you are supposed to do that on a **misspelt** text.
Good luck :D

European languages don't have this problem, as distinct words can be easily
recognized. CJK languages do though, but I guess CJK spellchecker status in OOo
is just the same as it is for Vietnamese.

To have an idea how hard it is to split a sentence into words, let's take a
corner case: « **Ông già đi nhiều quá** ». You can understand this sentence in
a couple of ways:

* An old man goes a long way (**Ông-già đi nhiều quá**, notice « **Ông già** »
  is a single word)
* He gets very old (**Ông già đi nhiều quá**, notice « **Ông già** » is two
  separate words)

Now suppose « **già** » is mistakenly written as « **dà** », then pass the
sentence to a grammar checker ;)

.. _../pages/guide/spell_checker_case_studies#could_we_train_a_spellchecker:

Could we train a spellchecker?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Is it possible to train a spellchecker, as one trains a Bayesian spamfiltering
program like `SpamSieve <http://c-command.com/spamsieve/>`_ on OSX? If we have
a group of volunteers each building up a corpus, and training the spellchecker
each time it makes a mistake, perhaps we could amass the data we need.

.. _../pages/guide/spell_checker_case_studies#this_discussion:

This discussion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You can follow this discussion on the specially-created `anoi-spell
<http://lists.hanoilug.org/listinfo/spell>`_ mailing list, or on the `Translate
Toolkit <https://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/translate-devel>`_
mailing list.

.. _../pages/guide/spell_checker_case_studies#quechua:

Quechua
-------

.. _../pages/guide/spell_checker_case_studies#amos_batto:

Amos Batto
^^^^^^^^^^

It is interesting hearing about the difficulties of spell checking in
Vietnamese. I have also run into problems using Hunspell to spellcheck Quechua
(an indigenous language of the Andes), but of a very different nature.

Quechua is an agglutinative language. Most words have 1 or 2 suffixes, but some
can have as many as 8 or 9 suffixes. Most suffixes have to be added in a very
specific order, but a few can appear in almost any order. Needless to say, the
possible combinations of suffixes is almost infinite and almost impossible to
list in an affix file. When I tried to write out all the possible combinations,
I got up to 500 pages of combinations and that was only combining 1, 2, and 3
suffixes.

Hunspell is much better than aspell and ispell because it allows an infix and 2
levels of suffixes, but it is still woefully inadequate for languages like
Quechua.

Another problem of Hunspell is a lack of a "sounds like" feature, as is found
in  Aspell. In Quechua, K, K', KH, Q, Q', QH are all easily confusable letters,
along with their Spanish equivalents: QU and C. In order to properly spellcheck
in Quechua a "sounds like" function needs to be added to Hunspell. The code for
"sounds like" shouldn't be that difficult to write, but the Hunspell code looks
pretty complicated and I haven't figured it out. 

//Note: Kevin Scannell, who was one of the developers of Aspell contacted me to
say that he intended to add the Aspell "SoundsLike" function to Hunspell. I
hope that he finds the time to do this since it will help me greatly.  Kevin
also noted that the metaphone function in Hunspell could act like SoundsLike to
some degree.//

If you have more interest in learning about the challenges of a Quechua
spellchecker, see `this note
<http://www.runasimipi.org/blanco-en.php?file=cartaHunspellPreguntas-en.txt>`_
I wrote to the Hunspell developer explaining our difficulties.

.. _../pages/guide/spell_checker_case_studies#zulu:

Zulu
----

.. _../pages/guide/spell_checker_case_studies#friedel_wolff:

Friedel Wolff
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The issue of agglutinative languages is quite interesting for me since we are
working on spellchecking in Zulu which is also of this nature.  We are starting
to work now on a program to help people review word lists and to identify word
roots. This is all done under the assumption that identifying roots is the most
important part of the work in terms of the words and word lists, and combined
with proper affix rules (developed separately), we can create a usable spell
checker (for an agglutinative language).

People interested can have a look at our `ideas for how this should work
<http://translate.sourceforge.net/specifications/Spelt/>`_. This is currently
really meant to be a small project that can be implemented quite quickly.

.. _../pages/guide/spell_checker_case_studies#statistical_support:

Statistical Support
-------------------

Kevin Scannell can generate word frequency lists and other useful statistics
for many languages (more than 400 as of May 2008) using his web crawling
software `An Crúbadán <http://borel.slu.edu/crubadan/>`_.   There's a good
chance your language is already supported if it has a non-trivial presence on
the web.  Contact him (kscanne at gmail dot com) if you are beginning
development of a spell checker and plan on releasing it under and open source
license. 

.. _../pages/guide/spell_checker_case_studies#your_language:

Your language
-------------
