
.. _../pages/guide/translateathon_halloffame#translate@thon_hall_of_fame:

Translate@thon Hall of Fame
***************************

If you have held a Translate@thon or Localisation Sprint then add yourself to
the Hall of Fame.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Date
     - Where
     - Language(s)
     - Organisers
     - Software Target
     - Results
     - Outcome
   * - :ref:`Feb 2004 <translateathon_halloffame#first_xhosa_translate_thon>`
     - UCT, Cape Town, South Africa
     - Xhosa
     - PRAESA, Translate.org.za, WC Language Committee
     - Mozilla
     -
     - :-)
   * - Jan 2005
     - UCT, Cape Town, South Africa
     - Xhosa
     - PRAESA, Translate.org.za
     - Firefox 1.0
     - 8000 words
     - =)                 
   * - Mar 2005
     - UCT, Cape Town, South Africa
     - Xhosa
     - PRAESA, Translate.org.za
     - Firefox 1.0
     - 8000 words            
     - :-)
   * - Mar 2005
     - DIT, Durban, South Africa
     - Zulu
     - DIT, Translate.org.za
     - Firefox 1.0
     - 4000 words
     - :-)                
   * - May 2005
     - DIT, Durban, South Africa
     - Zulu
     - DIT, Translate.org.za
     - Firefox 1.0
     - 4000 words
     - :-\                
   * - April 2007
     - AITI, Accra, Ghana
     - Yoruba, Twi, Wolof, Hausa, Gun, Akan, Vai, Yemba, N'ko, Krio, Amharic
     - FOSSFA, Translate.org.za
     - Tuxpaint, Worpress subset
     - +- 600 per language
     - :-)                
   * - May 2007
     - Rhodes University, Grahamstown, South Africa
     - Xhosa
     - SANTED, Translate.org.za
     - Horde and IMP
     - 10 000 words
     - :-)                
   * - Aug 2008
     - Makerere University, Kampala, Uganda
     - Luganda
     - Makerere, Rhodes, Translate.org.za
     - Firefox
     - ? words
     - :-) 300 students   

.. _../pages/guide/translateathon_halloffame#comment_on_your_event:

Comment on your event
=====================

Please do not add too many descriptive comments rather add comments that you
feel would help other people run an event in the future.  Also use this area to
highlight why you rated your outcome as you did in the table above.

.. _translateathon_halloffame#first_xhosa_translate_thon:

First Xhosa Translate@thon in Cape Town, South Africa
-----------------------------------------------------

Neville Alexander, an ex-political prinsoner who spent time on Robin Island,
started the event and noted that major events in history where often formulated
late at night around a kitchen table.  Fitting as the event was held in a
basement lab.

We used Excel with CSV file.  This proved awfull as we could not really
integrate the work following the event and it took a long time to setup the
computers.  There were a lot of people 20+ and only one techie which was
difficult.

.. _guide/translateathon_halloffame#localisation_training_and_translate@thon_in_accra,_ghana:

Localisation training and Translate@thon in Accra, Ghana
--------------------------------------------------------
We trained 16 people from mostly West Africa in many localisation issues and
attempted Tuxpaint and a WordPress subset by translating Pootle. Pootle helped
languages without keyboard layouts with the extra characters and provided a
nice way of seeing the progress on the statistics page. This was the first time
we translated from another language (Wolof, Yemba and N'ko localisers
translated from French).  Only the Amharic team had to use POEdit, since the
special input method is needed. They could simply upload files without
problems.
